THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly
resolved to constitute India into a 1
[SOVEREIGN
SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and
to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual
and the 2
[unity and integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twentysixth day of November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT,
ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
CONSTITUTION.
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
1. (1) India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
1
[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as
specified in the First Schedule.]
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—
(a) the territories of the States;
2
[(b) the Union territories specified in the First
Schedule; and]
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
2. Parliament may by law admit into the Union, or
establish, new States on such terms and conditions as it
thinks fit.
3
2A. [Sikkim to be associated with the Union.] Rep. by the
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f.
26-4-1975).
3. Parliament may by law—
(a) form a new State by separation of territory
from any State or by uniting two or more States or
parts of States or by uniting any territory to a part of
any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State:
4
[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be
introduced in either House of Parliament except on the
recommendation of the President and unless, where the
proposal contained in the Bill affects the area, boundaries
or name of any of the States 1
***, the Bill has been referred
by the President to the Legislature of that State for
expressing its views thereon within such period as may
be specified in the reference or within such further period
as the President may allow and the period so specified or
allowed has expired.]
2
[Explanation I.—In this article, in clauses (a) to (e),
"State'' includes a Union territory, but in the proviso,
"State'' does not include a Union territory.
Explanation II.—The power conferred on Parliament
by clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or
Union territory by uniting a part of any State or Union
territory to any other State or Union territory.]
4. (1) Any law referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall
contain such provisions for the amendment of the First
Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be necessary
to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
provisions (including provisions as to representation in
Parliament and in the Legislature or Legislatures of the
State or States affected by such law) as Parliament may
deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of
article 368.
PART II
CITIZENSHIP
5. At the commencement of this Constitution, every
person who has his domicile in the territory of India
and—
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory
of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory
of India for not less than five years immediately
preceding such commencement,
shall be a citizen of India.
6. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person
who has migrated to the territory of India from the
territory now included in Pakistan shall be deemed to be
a citizen of India at the commencement of this
Constitution if—
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his
grandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted);
and
(b) (i) in the case where such person has so
migrated before the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he
has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India
since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated
on or after the nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has
been registered as a citizen of India by an officer
appointed in that behalf by the Government of the
Dominion of India on an application made by him
therefor to such officer before the commencement of
this Constitution in the form and manner prescribed
by that Government:
 Provided that no person shall be so registered unless
he has been resident in the territory of India for at least
six months immediately preceding the date of his
application.
7. Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a
person who has after the first day of March, 1947,
migrated from the territory of India to the territory now
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen
of India:
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a
person who, after having so migrated to the territory now
included in Pakistan, has returned to the territory of India
under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued
by or under the authority of any law and every such
person shall for the purposes of clause (b) of article 6 be
deemed to have migrated to the territory of India after the
nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person
who or either of whose parents or any of whose
grandparents was born in India as defined in the
Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted),
and who is ordinarily residing in any country outside
India as so defined shall be deemed to be a citizen of
India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the
country where he is for the time being residing on an
application made by him therefor to such diplomatic or
consular representative, whether before or after the
commencement of this Constitution, in the form and
manner prescribed by the Government of the Dominion of
India or the Government of India.
9. No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of
article 5, or be deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue
of article 6 or article 8, if he has voluntarily acquired the
citizenship of any foreign State.
10. Every person who is or is deemed to be a citizen
of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may
be made by Parliament, continue to be such citizen.
11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part
shall derogate from the power of Parliament to make
any provision with respect to the acquisition and
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating
to citizenship.